Yeah, he'd better see about his time. No, I'm fine.
I'm fine. I'm fine.
And what about this collection? Well, it was kept
in a museum. The little building was on the corner
across from the system administration building.
The old swine cholera virus lab. There's a little
tiny building in there. And it was made into a
museum. But then they found out that the state of
Texas wouldn't fund any money to keep up a museum.
You were not supposed to have a museum in a
university in the state of Texas. Well, they just
aren't going to put out money for a thing like that.
So I think that most of that collection was put down
underneath that building in a basement or
something. And many years later, when they began
to tear the old belly down, they found an old mummy,
and I don't know if Dr. Francis had more stuff, some
little foot bones from Eohippus, the first horse,
and I don't know what all he had down, and old
mastodon teeth and head and bones that he had dug
up, old femurs and tibias and so on that from
mastodons that he had dug up. All the stuff he found
on the Brazos? On the Brazos River, yeah. And the
clay pits and gravel pits and so on. So somebody
wondered, well, where did all this stuff come
from? I read it in the battalion. Big question.
They found this stuff down there. They didn't know
anything about where it was from. Well, it was the
tail end of what was left of Ball and Francis'
collection. And I don't know what's happened to
them since then, but those things should have been
preserved, especially Dr. Ball's. Because Dr.
Ball spent many, many hours, painstaking work, on
getting that material ready for presentation. It
was a wonderful exhibit. He was an old Leipzig
graduate, Ph.D. from Leipzig. No kidding. He
graduated from Virginia first and then Ph.D. from
Leipzig.
Quite a scholar. Why do you think that Dr. Francis
was given the Dean of the College, or the School of
Veterinary Medicine? I think it was because he was
the first one in there. He developed the treatment
for the cattle fever tick and so on, tick fever
treatment. At least we give him credit for that. So
he had it.
So I think that's the reason he was made dean. I
think he made a very good dean. He was good. And at
that time, he was all right. He was head of the
Department of Anatomy and dean of the College of,
or School of Veterinary Medicine it was then. How
did he get along with the other administrators in
other schools? Very well, very well. I think they
all loved Dr. Francis. He was an old Ohio State
University man. So Mr. Williams over in Animal
Husbandry was from Ohio State. So many of them were
from Ohio State. In fact, veterinary medicine was
under Ohio State for many years. From Dr. Francis,
through Dr. Marsteller, through Dr. Dunn,
through Dr. Armistead, through Dr. Boughton,
clear on down. All from Ohio State. Why? They
passed it on, I guess. I don't know. Of course, it
was all up to the board of directors.
But Ohio State played a big part in the development
of A&M. Well, Ohio State, in one of their
anniversary
statements, they made statements. Doc, if they
hadn't produced but one man, and that man was Dr.
Francis, Ohio State would have been more than
repaid for the money they had put out on it. Yeah, I
read that. Something like that. Yeah, that was.
Anyway. Can you tell me something about the
curriculum in the vet school back in the 1930s?
Well, the curriculum has been expanded quite a
bit. Yes, absolutely. Since those days. Here's an
old 1929-30 catalog. Bullitt, Texas A&M. You can
look over here. Yeah, we have those at the
archives. Yeah. I don't know whether you have many
of these old timers or not. But you can see they had
very little. Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology and Department of Veterinary
Pathology, Associate Professor Horton. Only one
person. He was my... Only one person. That has
changed, hasn't it? Yeah. Here's Department of
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery. Marstella,
Associate Professors Leonard and Dunn. And
Anatomy, Professor Francis. Only one. And the
courses. Well, some of these courses were for
animal husbandry students. This anatomy and
physiology of domestic animals and animal
diseases, those were AH courses. The 111, 112, and
211, and 213 were the courses, the four courses for
veterinary students in anatomy. Of course, that
has been enlarged quite a bit now, along with
graduate. Now, for graduates, they had only one
course, 511, 512, veterinary anatomy. And Dr.
Francis told him. Dr. Francis didn't teach much in
the way of histology nor embryology either. I
think on rainy days the students went in and drew
pictures of the liver and spleen and lungs and
heart. That's
it. Because he just had these little old high
school microscopes that didn't have any slides.
So if the supply situation was that poor, what do
you think of the quality of education back in the
1930s, especially in comparison to today, or
1970? It doesn't compare. There's no comparison.
The people who graduated back in those days To me,
it would be like quacks if they didn't keep up. I can
say that in their clinics, they had very good
instruction from Leonard and from Marstella and
Dunn in the clinical years. But other than
physiology
and bacteriology
and anatomy, gross anatomy, their education was
minus it was lacking terribly lacking but i can say
this for our education today our pre-clinical
years i would put them up with anybody's medical
school in fact i think a lot more of our courses in
the first two years in veterinary medicine than i
do in human medicine oh really And I mean that to be
true because I have taken most of the courses in the
first two years in medicine. And I have a good
comparison there. And I like our first two years
much better than I do. They would be better
grounded in human medicine if they had our first
two years. Their clinical years, they may have
something on us. I think they do. But... Not the
first two years.
But back in those days, of course. It was the same
way in human medicine in 1927 in Galveston, the
year I was there as a freshman,
as it was when I started out in veterinary
medicine. Very poor in veterinary medicine, much
better in human medicine. But as the years went,
our first two years are better than theirs, and I'd
put that down for anybody. I think they'd do much
better if, this is off the record, if they could
just put their medical students over with us for
the first two years and then take them in their
clinical years over there. I talked to, this is off
the record, the other day I talked to Dick Davis,
and he's been in physiology and pharmacology for
many years, and I put him up above anybody they've
got over there in human medicine. And the
pathology that even I know, and I have kept up with
my pathology through the years,
I'd be willing to just sit down with anybody they
have over there, from the head of their department
on down, and let's just have a little test here and
see what we do with these things. Even though I've
been in anatomy since 1940. I did pathologic work
for our graduate students in veterinary medicine
for many years because they didn't have a
diagnostic laboratory. If they had some tissue
and they wanted to know what it was, what kind of a
tumor am I dealing with, they sent it to me in
anatomy. And for many years I did that. That was on
the side. I don't know how many thousand of
specimens I've sent back to them. The stain
sliding all the way right up and so on. That's the
reason when, this is off the record, when I
retired, 5,000 bucks for this nice Caribbean trip
and $1,000 sponge and money for her. Because I had
given them worlds of service through the years.
But to me, it was a source of, in pathology, it was a
source of material coming in. Because I would run
into things that they didn't know what it was. See,
on Grow Sick, they couldn't make a diagnosis. So
they sent it to me. Well, I was getting all of this
material to make class sets from, as well as what I
was picking up off post-mortem. So it worked out to
my advantage, too, as well as to theirs. What did
you think of your student colleagues back in the
1930s? What was their quality? They were good
students. That's what I've heard from them. They
were all good students. They were older people.
There wasn't but one single person in the group.
There were 16 in my class. They were all married but
one. And wives were helping them. They were all
earnest, hardworking guys. Every one of them. And
they've all done well.
Some of them are dead and gone. Well, why'd you stay
on? Why'd you stay on? So many of those other people
went out and started private practices. Yes,
sure. But some of them didn't. Some of them went on
in teaching, like George Yeats in my class. He's
been at the University of Florida for many years.
In fact, he was taken down there to be dean of their
College of Veterinary Medicine. state
legislature fiddling around so long that he was
too old when they finally got the money passed so
they have someone else as dean. George is in his 60s
now. He's too old to be dean. Well, I would put it to
you this way. You had started out in medicine, and
you had tuberculosis. And you were told at the
state sanatorium out at Carlsbad do not go back
into what you were doing when you broke down. So
when I finished in veterinary medicine, I had no
idea at all of going out into a hard practice,
because that practice of veterinary medicine is
hard. I mean, any hour of the day or night, any kind
of weather, and you were out there in the pasture a
lot or somewhere, in the sleet or rain or mud or what
have you. And so teaching was what I wanted to do.
And I think that I prepared myself for it by going on
in pathology at Michigan. But you couldn't do much
in those days on $1,800 or $1,500. No.
When Dr. Mundink left in anatomy in 1940, Dr.
Marsteller didn't know who he was going to put in as
head of the department, because I was in
pathology. Well, Dr. Mundink recommended me. Dr.
Mundink left here and went with Latterly
Laboratories as their chief veterinarian. He had
a good place with them.
Dr. Marsteller offered me headship of anatomy.
Paid me $3,600 a year, 12 months, $300 a month.
Well, we had bought this lot. We built our house and
bought a car. Ruth was teaching school at Curtin.
Oh, really? Yeah. What year was this now? This was
in 1936. She had been teaching in Crockett, and she
had had taught in the little school, Austonio,
this side of Crockett on 21, a little consolidated
school. And then we married in 34, and she taught
over there two years, and then had an opportunity
to pick up what she had to, let's
see here. You were brought here to Curtin to do what
to them in English? Affiliated. They wanted
someone who could affiliate. And they had to have
someone with a degree to affiliate their high
school subjects. And so they brought her over
here. We lived in Bryan for two years in apartments
there. And they built a teacherage curtain. And
then we moved out there and lived in the teacherage
until we built this house and moved in here. And
Ruth quit teaching. I told her she could either
teach And we'd live in apartments, or else if we had
a home, she'd have to quit teaching and take care of
the home. One or the other. It was up to her. So she
said, I want a home. So here we are, right here. So
no, I never intended to practice when I went in on
finishing veterinary medicine. The competition
for that job that you received must have been
rather tough, wasn't it? It was tough. But I think I
had the best qualifications. I had three degrees
at that time, bachelor's, master's, and a degree
in veterinary medicine. And in those days, if you
look at this old 1930 catalog, you'll find that a BS
and MS was about all most people had. Very few of
them had a degree in philosophy. Darnell was a...
BS from Mississippi A&M 1913, master's from
Missouri in 1916. And that's about as far as any of
them went. Well, Thomas Otto Walton didn't have
anything but a bachelor's degree and an LLD.
I guess he was one of the best presidents we ever
had.
Now, I'm not quite clear on why you went to
Michigan. Can you explain that to me again? I went
to Michigan to study pathology. Because under Dr.
Wharton there, I didn't have it. Well, I decided
to, that since I was in pathology, I would go on and
get a PhD in pathology. So I went up there to do that.
And I got all the coursework. And then I had this
opportunity to become head of anatomy as a full
professor. A full professor? The head department
in those days, you automatically became a full
professor. So I went instructor, assistant
professor to full professor. You couldn't pass
that up. No way I could pass that one up. No way. I
think there's $300 raised, too. Really? Worse
than that. We were making $1,800. It was twice as
much. 100% increase in salary? Felt the house and
bought a car. Absolutely. And well, it was the same
way in anatomy through the years. I didn't have
time to do anything but teach and be my technician.
I didn't have time for research. I didn't have much
time for writing. And that's the reason that you
look into what I have written in the way of
technical stuff, and it's very little. Because on
up through 1955, I was it. I had to do all my work. I
don't know why it was. It was changed when the dean
of Cornell Veterinary College What was his name?
Anyhow, he came here, one of the AVMA Committees on
Investigation of Veterinary Colleges. They
appraise them every so often. And he went to talk. I
told him. I had him out here one evening for dinner.
And I told him I had been my own technician too many
years. And I couldn't see paying. head of
department salary for a technician. And he jumped
Dr. Marsteller about it. And Dr. Marsteller gave
me a part-time technician. A part-time
technician. This was only half time. And up to that
time, I had no secretary in the department either.
Okay, not one? No. You buzz me, Miss Blue. No.
So I got a half-time. Well, I don't know whether it
was half-time. Anyway, Dr. Burns in physiology
let me use his secretary for an hour or two a day. If I
had anything to type or keep books, you had to keep
your orders and everything. So
in 1955, I would say that I began to get some
technical help and secretarial help. Up to that
time, no. I was it. Well, let's go back to the
Depression, because I'm really interested in the
Depression here in Texas. It wasn't nearly as
severe as it was in many other parts of the country.
But, and you already have described some of the
conditions, but were there any shortages on
campus ever that you remember, like food or
anything like that? No problem with any food lines
in Bryan? No, no. They had, over in the animal
husbandry department, I remember they were
killing cattle and canning the meat. Really? for
the bread lines or whatever they had before people
in Bryan, around in this community. In the county.
You could go there, I guess, and get canned meat.
And I know Ruth was out at Curtin in those days, and
they had a food program. She'd get a barrel of
butter, old rancid butter, and those people, I
mean, a big barrel, yeah, a 50-gallon barrel of
butter or whatever. Was there creamery here? I
don't know. Where was that stuff from? Where'd you
get that from? It's government. Oh, government.
Government. It was all federal. But she said that
the people who actually didn't need it were the
ones who came and got it. Old rancid butter. That
reminds me of that story of this. black man in
Crockett long years ago. And he, of course,
couldn't read and write. He went in the grocery
store there to get some cheese. And the grocery man
played a trick on him. He just gave him a little can
of axle grease. And this fella dipped it. This is
off the record. He got his crackers, you know, and
started eating that stuff. And after a while, the
grocer says, Sam? How is that? Or I said, that's
pretty good cheese, but it sure am rancid. Right,
he said, sure am ransom. Sure am ransom. He's
eating that axle grease.
My goodness. But I don't know how many cattle they
killed over there, Every day, I know Dr. Wharton
went over and inspected the pathologist. He went
over and did all their meat inspection work for
them. He was busy over there most of the time
inspecting meat. And all that went into a can, old
canners, about all they had. We called them hat
racks, old poor cows.
I don't think they ever got anything that was fit to
eat. And who would they give this canned meat to?
Mostly blacks. In the area, in this county then? I
don't know whether they shipped any of it or not. I
don't know. I know they had that program going over
there. I know the meat was supposed to be given out
to in the community. But insofar as I know, there
was no shortage of food. I know I didn't have any
shortage of food. We ate lots of beans and sweet
potatoes. I know I was doing my cooking up there in
the biology. I was a graduate assistant up there.
And there was another old boy taking graduate work
by the name of Towns, Homer Towns. So he and I did all
our cooking. in bacteriology. I was in
bacteriology then. So every time we'd fire up the
gas stove for sterilization of glassware, we
could stick a couple of sweet potatoes in the back
of it. Or if we had something to autoclave, a piece
of meat or what have you, some beans, just put them
back in the back of the autoclave and rev her up, you
know, and sterilize whatever you had. You're also
cooking your Do dinner. Or whatever. Yeah, we did
all our cooking over there in bacteriology in the
preparation lab. But I don't think the college
knew anything about it. They still don't. And they
still don't. In fact, one semester, I lived up
there. Really? Now this is off the record. I'm
going to have to erase this old tape now. I had a pot
that I put up on top of the shelving in the stock
room. And what building was this now? In the old
biology building. It's been torn down. About what
year was this? This was long about 1934, about 34.
That was the only way that I could make it, to do my
own cooking and not have to pay for board and room
somewhere. Otherwise, I couldn't have gone. But
they never did. So you lived up in this. What about
the janitor? I mean, didn't they ever lock the
doors of this building? Well, yeah. Were you ever
locked out and had to sleep in trees or anything? I
had a key to the door. But janitorial help, they
were all gone by 9 o'clock. And I was always up there
working. I was running all this experimental work
for my master's degree. So I figured if anybody
ever caught me up there, by golly, I had to stay up
there and check my growth. I was supposed to be
living in Bryan. In fact, they looked over the
place that this day's student was supposed to be
living in in Bryan. And they passed on it. It was a
very nice place, which I never stayed in. I took
them in here to show them where I was staying. And
the people there were very nice about it. They
never asked us, you're living here. Oh, really?
Well, that's nice.
We had some very good students in those days. And
they all seemed to have plenty of money. Really?
Yeah. Back in the Depression? Yeah. How can you
account for that? Well, here was Frankie Turia.
Frankie Turia was from Brownsville.
Y-T-U-R-I-A. Well, his people were wealthy.
Frank had a Cadillac, and he had his horse, and his
silver-trimmed saddle, and everything else.
Sure. But there were people like old Joe White. Joe
White's father was an MD, a veterinarian, and an
MD, too, in Tennessee. And I think he was president
of the state medical board and what have you. Old
Joe had cars and what have you. Their parents were
wealthy and could send them. We weren't. Of course
we weren't. We weren't. Wondering where our next
meal was coming from. I can remember the time when I
caught a ride from College Station to Bryan at
noon, and that was quite a trip in those days. It was
country roads. I had a dime, and for that dime I
could get a bigger hamburger in Bryan than I could
at College Station. They put tomatoes and stuff on
it in Bryan.
It was worth a ride. It was worth a big thumb. Of
course, you could ride on the train, Brian, for 20
cents. But you wouldn't have had it. I didn't have
20 cents. I had to dine for that hamburger that I was
going to get. But that's all I had. I had an old pair
of corduroy breeches that I wore most of the time.
And I'd wash them out. about once every two weeks on
Saturday afternoon if it was pretty. I could hang
them in the sun and I'd stay inside. I didn't have
anything else put on. No kidding? Oh. Really? Just
an old pair of corduroy breeches. Just an old pair
of corduroy breeches. And I wore that kind of. Now
what happened when you became a professor all of a
sudden? Oh. I was in the money then. Oh, so how did
you dress then? I wore a suit. Mm-hmm. Yeah. He was
the best dressed man. I wore a suit. The one thing
Ruth would never let me do was leave home without a
nice shine. I don't care if it's raining outside. I
said, what's the use of shining them? It's
raining. She said, well, at least you leave home
looking nice.
Bless her. And she has a breather in her left shoe
now because she Dropped a four-pound can of orange
juice on that foot off the shelf down at Piggly
Wiggly the other day. You know what a breather is?
That's a breather. Really? No kidding. Now that
you've talked about it, I'll take it off. Yeah. She
didn't have trouble with her foot for a week. Well,
let's talk for a minute here about why you went on to
get a PhD at Galveston. In Galveston? Yeah. Why did
you do that? just for my own
satisfaction I guess. That was all.